id: btkG1Jy_TSk
title: The DEVASTATING plan to END Trump’s presidency
uploader: David Pakman Show
channel: David Pakman Show
upload_date: 20250814
duration: 7:25
view_count: 289488
like_count: 16076
categories: ['News & Politics']
tags: ['david pakman show', 'david pakman', 'politics', 'news', 'breaking news', 'donald trump', 'trump', 'trump news', 'president', 'elections', 'republicans', 'democrats', 'progressive', 'us news']
webpage_url: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=btkG1Jy_TSk
description: ```⚠️ Ground News: Get 40% OFF their unlimited access Vantage plan at https://ground.news/pakman
-- Gavin Newsom unveils an aggressive redistricting strategy in California aimed at flipping House seats from Republicans to Democrats

Become a Member: https://www.davidpakman.com/membership 
Subscribe to our (FREE) Substack newsletter: https://davidpakman.substack.com/ 
Get David's book: https://davidpakman.com/book

David on Instagram:   / david.pakman   
David on Bluesky: https://bsky.app/profile/davidpakman.... 
David on Threads: https://www.threads.net/@david.pakman 
TDPS Subreddit:   / thedavidpakmanshow   
Pakman Discord: https://www.davidpakman.com/discord 
Facebook:   / davidpakmanshow   

David's tech:
Camera: Panasonic Lumix G85 https://amzn.to/4fOir5a 
Microphone: Shure SM7B: https://amzn.to/3hEVtSH 
Voice Processor: dbx 266xs https://amzn.to/3B1SV8N 
Stream Controller: Elgato Stream Deck XL https://amzn.to/4fOGJvE 
Microphone Cloudlifter: https://amzn.to/2T9bhne 

Timely news is important! We upload new clips every day! Make sure to subscribe!

Original show date August 14, 2025

#davidpakmanshow #trump #redistricting
```

transcript:
Welcome to the show everybody. I have
something to talk to you about today
that is a great thing that Democrats are
doing. It's rare. It's rare that we have
something specific to fight for. It's
not a press release. It's not, oh, we
are going to file a lawsuit. Not
ignoring the importance of lawsuits, but
this is something real. This is
something we can get involved in. This
is something we can donate to if we
want. And it has the potential to stop
the Trump administration in its tracks
effectively by taking back Congress by
doing some aggressive redistricting.
Now, I'm going to tell you everything
that's going on. I will tell you why I
think it's a good thing and maybe you
disagree and you'll tell me why, but
maybe you will agree. California
Governor Gavin Newsome has launched the
most aggressive counter strike that we
have seen against Donald Trump's grip on
Congress. What Gavin Newsome has
announced is that California will draw
brand new congressional maps. These maps
will be subject to the approval of
California residents. There will be a
referendum. If California residents
don't want this, then it's not going to
happen. And that makes this very
different than what Texas is doing. Now,
you might be saying, "David, I thought
you were against gerrymandering." And of
course, I am, but I'm also against
unilateral disarmament. And I will
explain in a moment. Uh Gavin Newsome
put out a post written in Donald Trump's
all cap style where he declared that
these congressional maps will end the
Trump presidency. He wrote, quote,
"Donald Taco Trump, as many call him,
missed the deadline. California will now
draw new, more beautiful maps. They will
be historic as they will end the Trump
presidency. Dems take back the house.
Big press conference this week with
powerful Dems and Gavin Newsome, your
favorite governor that will be
devastating for MAGA. Thank you for your
attention to this matter." signed GN
Gavin Nuome. So, here's the play. Redraw
the maps in an overtly politically
partisan way, right? There's no there's
no uh hiding that. Knock out up to five
Republican seats in California. Flip the
House back to Democrats in 2026. By the
way, we might even see some prominent
Republicans kicked out of Congress if
this passes. And then what happens?
Trump's secondterm agenda, which is
shaky by the way, is dead. It's dead in
the water. We're gonna take your
representatives and get rid of them.
Now, let's be serious for a moment.
Let's be sober. I've been against
gerrymandering my entire political
career. When I was five and I moved to
the United States, I proudly declared as
we land triumphantly and courageously at
JFK airport, I said, "I am here and I am
against gerrymandering." I was only
five. It's undemocratic.
It is a way to rig elections and neither
party should be doing it. But the
problem is that Republicans have already
decided gerrymandering is their golden
ticket to permanent power. Texas trying
to add five Republican seats. Other
Republican states have already done it.
The map overall is already gerrymandered
by Republicans. Democrats in the House
to get 50% of the seats, depending on
the analysis, need 54% of the vote.
That's gerrymandered for Republicans.
I'm against gerrymandering, but I'm not
going to unilaterally disarm. We're
going to fight fire with fire. And
remember, this is up for a referendum in
California. If California residents
don't want it, they won't get it. So, we
shouldn't sit back and say, "We're going
to be better people." They can
gerrymander to high heaven and keep the
house and win the house, but we're not
going to do anything. We're just going
to sit aside. And Gavin Newsome is
saying, "Not this time." Now, you don't
have to like Gavin Newsome. You might
say, "Gavin Newsome is too far to the
right, or he's too far to the left."
There's people that say both. Or he's
too slick for his own good, or I don't
like that hairstyle, or whatever. But
he's fighting. And unfortunately, I hate
to admit it, that is more than can be
said for a lot of Democrats right now.
So, California's le leg legislature is
going to prepare the maps. Nuome has
even uh um uh floated the idea
um that well actually I'm not even going
to get that, but I'm going to talk about
what could happen in other states in a
moment. But the point here is this is
not a vague process. Republicans are
already screaming about fairness, which
is rich coming from the people who
perfected the concept of unfair maps,
racially biased maps, politically biased
maps. But the bottom line is this.
If Democrats retake the House in 2026,
Donald Trump's supposed unstoppable
presidency, his mandate, his
unrestrainable agenda is dead. And now
many of you will say, "Isn't this a race
to the bottom?" If Cal if California
does it because Texas is doing it and
then that's right, but they've already
done it. Since they've already done it,
the upside is all on the Democratic
side. Kathy Hokll should do the same
damn thing in New York. JB Pritsker
should do the same thing in Illinois.
And this can effectively end the Trump
presidency. We need people who will
fight. If we acknowledge that this
presidency is as dangerous as many of us
know it to be, why wouldn't we take any
legal means necessary or legal means
possible to just make it run into a
brick wall? So, if given the chance, I
would end all gerrymandering today. I
would end all of it right now. We're not
there and we have to find a way to stop
Trump. We've got something to fight for.
This is something if you want to donate
to the the uh redraw campaign for the
ballot referendum, then you can do it.
And now I want to talk about the bigger
strategy for Democrats. A pending
Supreme Court case could strip our
Fourth Amendment rights and allow
immigration agents to come into our
homes for any reason. No probable cause
needed. All while Republicans try to
twist things. So that you think this is
all great for America. This should be
the biggest story in the US right now,
but it's almost impossible to keep up
with the millions of moves that Trump is
making every single day. That's why
Ground News exists. Ground News is an
app and website that exposes the blind
spots and spin before it takes control
of our opinions. Ground News is the
smarter, more reliable way to stay
informed when MAGA is banking on us
getting distracted. I'm partnering up
with Ground News to give you 40% off the
same Vantage plan that I use. So, you'll
pay only five bucks a month for all of
their premium features. Just go to
ground.news/pacman
or use the code Pac-Man in the app when
you sign up. The link is in the
description or scan the QR
